RFM Analysis

What did we do and what did we find

To begin we had to connect sqlite and python, then load the cleaned table (retail_clean) using pandas
The InvoiceDate column is then made into datetime so we can see the recency of the purchases

We then create a RFM table with each row representing a customer
The recency measures how many days it has been since customer ordered
The frequency measures how many orders customers have placed
The monetary is the amount spend

Once the RFM table is created, we rank the customers from 1-5 for each of their RFM values
For recency 

The scores are not manually chosen, python uses the distribution of the data to decide each score group.
It is divided into five 20% groups, ranging from lowest to highest for every rfm based on this they receive 
a score from 1 - 5.

For Recency, a lower number of days is better, so customers who purchased more recently receive a higher 
score. For Frequency and Monetary value, higher values are better, so customers who bought more often and
spent more receive higher scores.

We the combine these scores to segment each customer into Champions, Potential Loyalist, At Risk, Lost, New Customers, and Regular Customers
Champions
R >= 4, F >= 4, and M >= 4

Potential Loyalists
R >= 4 and F >= 2

At-Risk
R <= 2 and F >= 4

Lost
R <= 2 and F <= 2

New Customers
R >= 4 and F = 1

Regular Customers
Everyone else

Results:
The RFM analysis grouped 5,878 customers into the customer segments (Champions - Regular).

Segment Counts:
Regular Customers: 1,647
Lost: 1,526
Champions: 1,292
Potential Loyalists: 892
At-Risk: 354
New Customers: 167


Customer count graph: 
Helps compare the size of each customer group (does not show revenue or value), shows distribution of customer base

The chart shows that Regular Customers are the largest segment, with 1,647 customers. Lost Customers are the second, with 1,526 customers. Champions are third, with 1,292 customers. Potential Loyalists, At-Risk Customers, and New Customers have much less customers

Revenue by Segment Graph:
A chart to show total revenue based on rfm segment. 

A segment may have fewer customers but it can still generate more money depending on how often and how much they spend.

The revenue chart showed that Champions generated the most revenue by far, with about 12.09 million in total revenue. Regular Customers generated about 2.82 million, At-Risk Customers generated about 1.13 million, Potential Loyalists generated about 987 thousand, Lost Customers generated about 668 thousand, and New Customers generated about 56 thousand
Regular customers were the largest group but champions are most valuable in revenue, this shows that the biggest group may not be the most profitable 

Analysis:
Note: The average values are summary metrics calculated after customers were segmented; they do not create the segments, but help explain the typical behavior of each group.
Regular customers had the most at 1647 customers, average recency of 187.54 days, average frequency of 4.40, an average value of $1710.57. This shows some buying history but not as frequent or valuable as champions. The business can aim to move regulars higher by encouraging purchases.
Lost customers make up 1526 customers, with average recency of 458.75 days, average frequency of 1.25 orders and average monetary value of $437.84. These people have not ordered in a long time and don’t buy often. It is made up of big groups but avoid expensive marketing since their spending and purchase frequency is low.
Champions are made up of 1292 customers, average recency of 19.73 days, average frequency of 17.13 orders, and average of $9355.60. They purchase the most recent, most often and most money. They are very valuable and need to be provided with good incentives like loyalty rewards, personalized offers, etc.
Potential Loyalists sit at around 892 customers, avg recency of 25.09 days, average frequency of 3.17 orders, average value of $1107.06. They purchase recently and show repeated purchase behavior however they are not as strong as Champions but have potential to become through encouraging purchases.
At-risk customers have 354 customers, average of 343.77 days, avg of 7.57 orders, and avg of $3184.27. This group buys often and spends more than a lot of other groups but they have not made recent purchases. They make for a good group to try and bring back using reactivation incentives.
New customers are the smallest with 167 customers, 29.55 days on avg, avg frequency of 1 order, and an avg of $334.24. This means they bought recently and most likely only once. Business should try to follow up and provide welcome discounts
Main Business Insight:

The RFM analysis shows that the each segment of customers speak a different story and thus we should tailor to them
Regular Customers and Lost Customers are the largest groups, but Champions are the most valuable group. Champions generated the most revenue and had the strongest customer behavior. At-Risk Customers are also important because they have strong purchasing behavior in the past but have not returned recently.

The recommendation we can use is to keep a balanced customer strategy and not treat each segment the same (but remember they are all important). 

Champions = protect them
Regular Customers = grow them
At-Risk Customers = win them back/re-engage
Potential Loyalists/New Customers = develop and encourage them
Lost Customers = win them back but keep risks in mind

Champions: loyalty rewards, personalized offers, and continued support
Regular Customers: Encourage more frequent purchases with product recommendations, bundles, and targeted promotions.
At-Risk Customers: Re-engage them with emails, limited-time discounts, and reminders
Potential Loyalists: Push them toward loyalty with follow-up offers, loyalty points, and personalized recommendations.
New Customers: Encourage a second purchase with welcome discounts, product suggestions, or follow-up emails.
Lost Customers: Use low-cost win-back incentives like discount emails or promotions.



